[APPSEC-58034] AAP for Go Dockerfiles (#30306)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/security/application_security/setup/go/dockerfile.md

Reviewer: This is pretty good I think. I think it'd be nice if we can (unsure whether the highlighter supports it?) highlight interesting/different lines in the `Dockerfile`s after the first one, to make it easier for readers to see where changes were made.

  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Troubleshooting App and API Protection"
---

# Introduction

App and API Protection for Go installation requirements can be abstract. Moreover the Go toolchain
cross-compilation and CGO capabilities can make it hard to understand what has to be done precisely.

In these cases, a more precise way to materialize these examples like a Dockerfile can be interesting.
The goal of this guide is to be a step-by-step guide to a working Dockerfile, tailor-fitted for your usecase.

## Walkthrough

A lot of Dockerfiles found in this guide come from [appsec-go-test-app][4] repository. To try it out, first clone the repository:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/DataDog/appsec-go-test-app.git
cd appsec-go-test-app
```

A list of `Dockerfile` examples can be found in the [`examples/docker`][3] directory.
Here is an example of it in its simplest form:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build
WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion # Resolved from go.mod dependencies

RUN orchestrion go build -o=main .

FROM debian:bookworm
COPY --from=build /app/main /usr/local/bin

ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/usr/local/bin/main" ]
```

> This constitutes the simplest version of a working Dockerfile for a Go application with Datadog's WAF enabled. If this is your first use of [Orchestrion][5]. This dockerfile requires to run `orchestrion pin` beforehand and commit the resulting changes for it to work. Please refer to our [Getting Started for Go][-]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the simplest version of a working Dockerfile for a Datadog WAF-enabled Go application. If this is your first use of [Orchestrion][5], note that this dockerfile requires you run `orchestrion pin` beforehand and commit the resulting changes. See [Getting Started for Go][-].
```

Reviewer 2: - I think there might have been a mixup in these sentences, so I tried to revise it for clarity.
- I assume there is a link coming for `[-]`.

Author: > I assume there is a link coming for [-].
No it was a typo. fixed it

```suggestion
This is the simplest version of a working Dockerfile for a Datadog WAF-enabled Go application. If this is your first use of [Orchestrion][5], note that this dockerfile requires you run `orchestrion pin` beforehand and commit the resulting changes. See [Getting Started for Go][6].
```

This Dockerfile is split into two stages:

> 1. The build stage builds from an Debian image the Go application using the [Orchestrion][5] tool to instrument it with App and API Protection features.
> 2. The runtime stage copies the built application into a minimal Ubuntu image and sets the environment variable `DD_APPSEC_ENABLED` to `true` to enable App and API Protection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The build stage uses a Debian image to build the Go application, and uses the [Orchestrion][5] tool to instrument the application with App and API Protection features.
2. The runtime stage copies the built application into a minimal Ubuntu image and sets the environment variable `DD_APPSEC_ENABLED` to `true` to enable App and API Protection.
```

> This two-stage build process is beneficial because it allows you to keep the final image small and free of unnecessary build tools.
> While still ensuring that your application is instrumented correctly for App and API Protection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This two-stage build process allows you to keep the final image small and free of unnecessary build tools while still ensuring that your application is instrumented correctly for App and API Protection.
```

The following sections show different Dockerfile scenarios, each with their specific considerations and complete examples.

## Dockerfile scenarios

Two main dimensions impact your Dockerfile choice for App and API Protection:
* **libc implementation**: glibc (Debian/Ubuntu) or musl (Alpine)
* **CGO**: enabled or disabled (with the env var `CGO_ENABLED`).

> These dimensions affect both build requirements and runtime compatibility. The Datadog WAF requires specific shared libraries (`libc.so.6` and `libpthread.so.0`) at runtime, and the build approach varies depending on these choices. Those dependencies are required by all programs built with CGO enabled, so the Datadog WAF will work out-of-the-box on runtime environments that support such programs. When CGO is disabled however, Go usually produces a fully statically linked binary that does not require these libraries but this is not true when using the Datadog WAF, which is why when CGO is disabled, the `-tags=appsec` flag needs to be passed in order for the Datadog WAF to be enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These dimensions affect both build requirements and runtime compatibility. The Datadog WAF requires specific shared libraries (`libc.so.6` and `libpthread.so.0`) at runtime and the build approach varies depending on these choices. Those dependencies are required by all programs built with CGO enabled, so the Datadog WAF will work out-of-the-box on runtime environments that support such programs. 

When CGO is disabled, however, Go usually produces a fully, statically linked binary that does not require these libraries. but this is not true when using the Datadog WAF. This is why, when CGO is disabled, the `-tags=appsec` flag needs to be passed to enable the Datadog WAF.
```

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build
WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion
RUN orchestrion go build -o=main .

FROM ubuntu:noble

COPY --from=build /app/main /usr/local/bin
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/usr/local/bin/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**
* Uses [Orchestrion][5] for compile-time instrumentation
* CGO is enabled by default, providing the required shared libraries
* The runtime uses the same libc implementation (glibc) as the build stage
* No additional packages needed in the runtime stage

### Glibc-built and Alpine runtime

If you need CGO but still want a lighter runtime image, build with a Debian-based image and run with Alpine:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build
WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion
RUN orchestrion go build -o=main .

FROM alpine

COPY --from=build /app/main /usr/local/bin/main
RUN apk add libc6-compat
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/usr/local/bin/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**
* No `appsec` build tag required
* `apk add libc6-compat` adds symlinks where necessary for a glibc-built binary to work on Alpine

> * This setup may require installing more packages at runtime if other libraries than Datadog use CGO.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* This setup may require installing more packages at runtime if other libraries than Datadog use CGO
```

### Alpine-based Dockerfile (CGO disabled)

> For minimal build and runtime size, using CGO disabled builds which is the default on Alpine:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For minimal build and runtime size, using CGO disabled builds (the default on Alpine):
```

COPY --from=build /app/libs /app/main /
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**
* Provides enhanced security by eliminating package managers and shells
* Requires library extraction similar to the scratch approach
* Runs as non-root user by default
* Maintains compatibility with glibc-based shared libraries

### Cross-compilation Dockerfile

For building applications targeting different architectures:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build
# Install cross-compilation toolchain
RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu

WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion

# Cross-compile for ARM64
ENV CGO_ENABLED=1 CC=aarch64-linux-gnu-gcc GOOS=linux GOARCH=arm64
RUN orchestrion go build -o=main .

FROM arm64v8/debian
COPY --from=build /app/main /usr/local/bin
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/usr/local/bin/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**
* Requires installing the appropriate cross-compilation toolchain
* Must set `CC`, `GOOS`, and `GOARCH` environment variables
* The runtime stage must match the target architecture
* CGO must be enabled for proper WAF integration

## Try it out

> Most of these Dockerfiles are availabe in [appsec-go-test-app][4], trying them out is very easy:

Author: ```suggestion
Most of these Dockerfiles are available in [appsec-go-test-app][4], trying them out is very easy:
```

- link: "/security/default_rules/?category=cat-application-security"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "OOTB App and API Protection Rules"
- link: "/security/application_security/troubleshooting"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Troubleshooting App and API Protection"
---

# Introduction

App and API Protection for Go installation requirements can be abstract and the Go toolchain
cross-compilation capabilities can make it hard to understand what has to be done precisely.

In these cases, a more precise way to materialize these examples like a Dockerfile can be interesting.
The goal of this guide is to be a step-by-step guide to a working Dockerfile, tailor-fitted for your usecase.

## Walkthrough

A lot of Dockerfiles found in this guide come from [appsec-go-test-app][4] repository. To try it out, first clone the repository:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/DataDog/appsec-go-test-app.git
cd appsec-go-test-app
```

A list of `Dockerfile` examples can be found in the [`examples/docker`][3] directory.
Here is an example of it in its simplest form:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build
WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion@latest && \
    orchestrion pin

> RUN orchestrion go build -o main .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN orchestrion go build -o=main .
```

Author: It already works as-is. Is this a strong opinion or can I close it?

> FROM ubuntu:noble

Author: let's go with bookworm since this is the current base image of golang:1

```suggestion
FROM debian:bookworm
```

COPY --from=build /app/main /usr/local/bin

ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/usr/local/bin/main" ]
```

This constitutes the simplest version of a working Dockerfile for a Go application with Datadog's WAF enabled.

> It would be better to run `orchestrion pin` ahead of time and commit it to your VCS for future builds, but this is not a strict requirement.

Reviewer: Cool, but that makes the "not so great" workflow be the 1st (and only) thing you show; and you're not even showing folks how to adjust their setup if they decide to go down this (better) route...

Author: At first this was more of a [tutorial](https://diataxis.fr/tutorials/) than a [how-to](https://diataxis.fr/how-to-guides/) but I guess this frontier is blurry now, I will do as you say

```suggestion
If this is your first use of [orchestrion][5]. This dockerfile requires to run `orchestrion pin` beforehand and commit the resulting changes for it to work. Please refer to our [Getting Started for Go][15]
```

This Dockerfile is split into two stages:
1. The build stage builds from an Debian image the Go application using the [Orchestrion][5] tool to instrument it with App and API Protection features.
2. The runtime stage copies the built application into a minimal Ubuntu image and sets the environment variable `DD_APPSEC_ENABLED` to `true` to enable App and API Protection.

This two-stage build process is beneficial because it allows you to keep the final image small and free of unnecessary build tools,
while still ensuring that your application is instrumented correctly for App and API Protection.

The following sections show different Dockerfile scenarios, each with their specific considerations and complete examples.

## Dockerfile scenarios

Two main dimensions impact your Dockerfile choice for App and API Protection:
* **libc implementation**: glibc (Debian/Ubuntu) or musl (Alpine)

> * **CGO**: enabled (default) or disabled (`CGO_ENABLED=0`)

Author: ```suggestion
* **CGO**: enabled or disabled (with the env var `CGO_ENABLED`).
```

These dimensions affect both build requirements and runtime compatibility. The Datadog WAF requires specific shared libraries (`libc.so.6` and `libpthread.so.0`) at runtime, and the build approach varies depending on these choices. When CGO is enabled, those libraries will always be required so the Datadog WAF can be baked in without issue. But CGO being disabled is often synonymous with no shared library, which cannot be the case out-of-the-box for Datadog WAF. This is why, by default, when CGO is disabled, the `-tags appsec` flag need to be passed. 

### Standard glibc-based Dockerfile

This is the recommended approach for most users, using Debian/Ubuntu-based images:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build

WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion@latest

> RUN orchestrion go build -o main .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN orchestrion go build -o=main .
```

FROM ubuntu:noble

COPY --from=build /app/main /usr/local/bin
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/usr/local/bin/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**
* Uses [Orchestrion][5] for compile-time instrumentation
* CGO is enabled by default, providing the required shared libraries
* The runtime uses the same libc implementation (glibc) as the build stage
* No additional packages needed in the runtime stage

### Glibc-built and Alpine runtime

If you need CGO but still want a lighter runtime image, build with a Debian-based image and run with Alpine:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build

WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion@latest

> RUN orchestrion go build -o main .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN orchestrion go build -o=main .
```

FROM alpine

COPY --from=build /app/main /usr/local/bin/main
RUN apk add libc6-compat
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/usr/local/bin/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**
* No `appsec` build tag required
* `apk add libc6-compat` adds symlinks where necessary for a glibc-built binary to work on Alpine
* This setup may require installing more packages at runtime if other libraries than Datadog use CGO.

### Alpine-based Dockerfile (CGO disabled)

For minimal build and runtime size, using CGO disabled builds which is the default on Alpine:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1-alpine AS build

WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion@latest

> RUN orchestrion go build -tags appsec -o main .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN orchestrion go build -tags=appsec -o=main .
```

FROM alpine

COPY --from=build /app/main /usr/local/bin/main
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/usr/local/bin/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**

> * Requires the `-tags appsec` flag when CGO is disabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Requires the `-tags=appsec` flag when CGO is disabled
```

### Minimal Dockerfile with library extraction

For ultra-minimal images when using `CGO_ENABLED=0`:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build

WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion@latest

# Build with appsec tag for CGO-disabled builds
ENV CGO_ENABLED=0
RUN orchestrion go build -tags appsec -o main .

# Install ldd and extract shared libraries that are necessary at runtime
RUN apt update && apt install -y binutils
RUN ldd main | tr -s '[:blank:]' '\n' | grep '^/' | \
      xargs -I % sh -c 'mkdir -p $(dirname libs%); cp % libs%;'

FROM scratch
COPY --from=build /app/libs /app/main /
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**
* Requires the `-tags appsec` flag when CGO is disabled
* Must manually extract and copy required shared libraries
* Results in the smallest possible image size
* The `ldd` command identifies all runtime dependencies

### Distroless Dockerfile

> For security-focused deployments using Google's distroless images:

Reviewer: Might be relevant to link to the Distroless documentation/presentation?

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build
WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion@latest

ENV CGO_ENABLED=0

> RUN orchestrion go build -tags appsec -o main .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN orchestrion go build -tags=appsec -o=main .
```

# Install ldd and extract shared libraries
RUN apt update && apt install -y binutils
RUN ldd main | tr -s '[:blank:]' '\n' | grep '^/' | \
      xargs -I % sh -c 'mkdir -p $(dirname libs%); cp % libs%;'

FROM gcr.io/distroless/base-debian12:nonroot
COPY --from=build /app/libs /app/main /
ENV DD_APPSEC_ENABLED=true
ENTRYPOINT [ "/main" ]
```

**Key considerations:**
* Provides enhanced security by eliminating package managers and shells
* Requires library extraction similar to the scratch approach
* Runs as non-root user by default
* Maintains compatibility with glibc-based shared libraries

### Cross-compilation Dockerfile

For building applications targeting different architectures:

```dockerfile
FROM golang:1 AS build
# Install cross-compilation toolchain
RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu

WORKDIR /app
COPY . .

RUN go install github.com/DataDog/orchestrion@latest

# Cross-compile for ARM64
ENV CGO_ENABLED=1 CC=aarch64-linux-gnu-gcc GOOS=linux GOARCH=arm64

> RUN orchestrion go build -o main .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN orchestrion go build -o=main .
```
